Chess is a strategy game that involves no hidden information and no elements of chance. It is played on a chessboard with 64 squares arranged in an 8×8 grid (Letters denote the horizontal side (file) & numbers the vertical side (rank) i.e a1 - h8). The players, referred to as "White" and "Black", each control sixteen pieces: one king (K), one queen (Q), two rooks (R), two bishops (B), two knights (N), and eight pawns (Denoted by the square it occupies). A square is denoted using the letter and the number e.g. if the queen moves to the d file & the 2nd rank you denote Qd2, similarly if the nights takes on the e file & 4th rank denote Nxe4. White moves first, followed by Black. The game is won by checkmating the opponent's king. There are several ways a game can end in a draw. It's origins can be traced to India with a similar game called chaturanga. The rules of chess as they are known today emerged in Europe at the end of the 15th century, with standardization and universal acceptance by the end of the 19th century. Organized chess arose in the 19th century. Chess competition today is governed internationally by FIDE (Fédération Internationale des Échecs; the International Chess Federation). The first universally recognized World Chess Champion, Wilhelm Steinitz, claimed his title in 1886; Ding Liren is the current World Champion. A huge body of chess theory has developed since the game's inception especially now with the help of chess engines. Chess is however not a solved game. Movements. Each piece's individual movements. Check and checkmate. When a king is under immediate attack, it is said to be in check. A move in response to a check is legal only if it results in a position where the king is no longer in check. The object of the game is to checkmate the opponent; this occurs when the opponent's king is in check, and there is no legal way to get it out of check. Castling. Once per game, each king can make a move known as castling. Castling consists of moving the king two squares toward a rook of the same color on the same rank, and then placing the rook on the square that the king crossed. Castling is permissible if the following conditions are met: Neither the king nor the rook has previously moved during the game. There are no pieces between the king and the rook. The king is not in check and does not pass through or finish on a square attacked by an enemy piece. Castling is still permitted if the rook is under attack, or if the rook crosses an attacked square. En passant. When a pawn makes a two-step advance from its starting position and there is an opponent's pawn on a square next to the destination square on an adjacent file, then the opponent's pawn can capture it en passant ("in passing"), moving to the square the pawn passed over. This can be done only on the turn immediately following the enemy pawn's two-square advance; otherwise, the right to do so is forfeited. Promotion. When a pawn advances to its eighth rank, as part of the move, it is promoted and must be exchanged for the player's choice of queen, rook, bishop, or knight of the same color. End of the game; i. Win A game can be won in the following ways: 1. Checkmate. 2. Resignation. 3. Win on time. 4. Forfeit e.g. a cheat. ii. Draw There are several ways a game can end in a draw: 1. Stalemate: When the opponent's king canot move and they aren't in check. 2. Dead position: If neither player is able to checkmate the other by any legal sequence of moves, the game is drawn. 3. Draw by agreement: In tournament chess, draws are most commonly reached by mutual agreement between the players. 4. Threefold repetition: This most commonly occurs when neither side is able to avoid repeating moves without incurring a disadvantage. 5. Fifty-move rule: If during the previous 50 moves no pawn has been moved and no capture has been made, either player can claim a draw. 6. Draw on time: In games with a time control, the game is drawn if a player is out of time and no sequence of legal moves would allow the opponent to checkmate the player. 7. Draw by resignation: Under FIDE Laws, a game is drawn if a player resigns and no sequence of legal moves would allow the opponent to checkmate that player. Time control. In competition, chess games are played with a time control. If a player's time runs out before the game is completed, the game is automatically lost (provided the opponent has enough pieces left to deliver checkmate).[2] The duration of a game ranges from long (or "classical") games, which can take up to seven hours (even longer if adjournments are permitted), to bullet chess (under 3 minutes per player for the entire game). Intermediate between these are rapid chess games, lasting between one and two hours per game, a popular time control in amateur weekend tournaments. Titles and rankings. Grandmaster (GM; sometimes International Grandmaster or IGM is used) is awarded to world-class chess masters. Apart from World Champion, Grandmaster is the highest title a chess player can attain. Before FIDE will confer the title on a player, the player must have an Elo rating of at least 2500 at one time and three results of a prescribed standard (called norms) in tournaments involving other grandmasters, including some from countries other than the applicant's. There are other milestones a player can achieve to attain the title, such as winning the World Junior Championship. International Master (IM). The conditions are similar to GM, but less demanding. The minimum rating for the IM title is 2400. FIDE Master (FM). The usual way for a player to qualify for the FIDE Master title is by achieving a FIDE rating of 2300 or more. Candidate Master (CM). Similar to FM, but with a FIDE rating of at least 2200. Theory. Chess theory usually divides the game of chess into three phases with different sets of strategies: the opening, typically the first 10 to 20 moves, when players move their pieces to useful positions for the coming battle; the middlegame; and last the endgame, when most of the pieces are gone, kings typically take a more active part in the struggle, and pawn promotion is often decisive
